Amendment Bill. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions, and we'll hand it over to you now.
Cool. Thank you, and thank you for hearing my submission,
or the submission from SiteSafe rather.
Just by way of background, obviously, the committee has our written submission.
But my name is Brett Murray, I lead SiteSafe New Zealand.
We are a not-for-profit organization,
created by the industry around 26 years ago now.
We're a membership organization, so we have about 6,000 member
businesses that are members of SiteSafe across the construction
sector, and we train about 70 to 75,000 workers
every year on behalf of the industry.
And certainly for most major
commercial projects,
the requirement to have a SiteSafe passport to get on site is
fairly uniformly mandatory across the industry.
What that means is that we're out on sites, or advisors are on sites on a daily
basis,
and we have a pretty clear view of how
I guess health and safety is working on site in the real world.
And
we certainly get a
firm viewpoint from our industry, from businesses both large
and small.
Last year when the reforms were first mooted, we went out and surveyed our
members,
and we had several hundred firms respond to that.
The feedback there was actually pretty positive,
particularly around the, I guess, the non-controversial aspects of
more focus on critical risk, more focus around role
clarity, clearer guidance. There was a strong, and I'm talking
upwards of 90% here,
support for better approved codes of practice.
Mm.
Back then when we did the survey, and this is one of the important points, the
focus was on reducing obligations on small,
low-risk businesses under 20. Now,
80% of the businesses that work in construction are probably under 20, maybe
slightly more.
In that survey,
nearly 80%, actually 79%,
viewed themselves as undertaking
moderately or high-risk work on a daily basis.
And I think that's pretty important, given that 80% of the businesses are
businesses that are under 20,
and 80% of those are under five. And the importance to
note in that is many of them don't have the resources that some of the
bigger firms have to manage health and safety,
in terms of having their own health and safety staff
on site. So they have to do it themselves, and one of the big roles that SiteSafe
plays is helping them to do that, giving them a level of confidence that they are
managing their risks well. Construction's a very dynamic
industry, as you know.
We don't want ambiguity, and one of the big things that's come out
of this as things have progressed is the removal of the term
low risk from the initial
proposals by MB. So that now
what you have in front of you is a bill
that talks about small businesses, not low-risk small businesses, but
small businesses
to only focus on critical risk rather than broad range of hazards that they're
likely to encounter on site. And we know that a lot of these risks are long
latency risks as well, which need to be managed, whether that's from dust
inhalation or slip, trips, and fall or stress stuff.
So, our key concern around this, although we're
generally supportive of obviously a greater focus on critical risk that will kill
people, is the removal of the low-risk
element.
Because what it's going to do, the fact is that
we don't have low-risk businesses in construction, without putting too fine a
point on it. Unless you're the guy changing the toilet rolls, most
businesses undertake high-risk work.
Most electrical firms are small businesses, most plumbing businesses,
businesses that do site works fall into that category, and in no
way would you consider those low-risk work.
Factor in the dynamic nature of construction, unlike some industries which are
reasonably steady state, construction is a fast-moving, dynamic
industry. You have a lot of people on site or can have a lot of people on site at
any one time, and especially on the big sites, the lead
contractors have to manage that.
And there's some real concern, particularly from the bigger contractors, but also
from some of the medium enterprises, that ending up with a two-tier system
where you've got some people on site working to different health and safety
rules or standards
from others on site, even though their work impacts those people who work
around them,
is going to cause real problems. And our fear is
that
if this goes through as it is,
then it's going to actually increase bureaucracy, because
the big contractors will just start writing into their contract
what their requirements are for health and safety, regardless of what the
legislation says, and they'll just be saying to small businesses, "Unless you sign
up to this, you're not coming on our site and you don't get work through us," which
would have a detrimental impact on a lot of those small businesses, obviously.
We feel that the law should make that
crystal clear,
reduce ambiguity, and make sure that if you are working on a construction
site doing high risk work, irrespective of your business size,
you should be meeting the
regulations should reflect that.
So, that's probably, obviously we've added
stuff in quite a bit more detail, but better focus is good,
false simplicity isn't, in our view
Thank you, Brett. Are you open for questions now?
Sure. Yeah.
Wonderful. We have a question from Dr. Panchi Pama.
Thank you so much, Brett, for your submission.
I see that you are concerned about other risks like repetitive work and
awkward postures as well. So how do you think we can put that
in legislation, and how can that be
monitored then?
I think in legislation, I think
one of the determinators here is
whether the committee goes with that term high-risk work and what does high-risk
work mean.
There's already ways of monitoring.
If you look at respiratory exposures and noise-induced hearing loss, the
companies already work to monitor them.
One of the issues around long latency
stuff,
manual and repetitive work and cumulative strain issues that
emanate from not only construction but other sectors as well.
Those things need to be managed. I don't think you can just switch off and go,
"Well, we don't consider them a critical risk, so you don't need to manage them,"
which is effectively what this is saying for smaller businesses.
And
that's not where we need to be going in New Zealand, I don't think.
Thank you. Question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah. Thanks, Brett. So
with the smaller businesses, because the feedback for...
And obviously, the minister found the smaller businesses were worried
about struggling with the amount of red tape, understanding what they had to
do. Through your working with your people and your
surveys, effectively, the solution forward to make it
easier for smaller business, was that just confirmed by having decent guidance and
that sort of thing? Was that basically what it boiled down to, codes of practice?
Yeah. One of the big things that came out of it was
95% of our members supported that
whole thing around clearer guidance and approved codes of practice.
Yeah.
The big guys, to be honest, are fine.
The act is performance-based, as we know.
The big guys are happy managing within that envelope, and obviously, they manage
their supply chain within an envelope.
As you get smaller and smaller in the businesses, they want more prescriptive.
Mm-hmm.
It becomes very much a just, "Look, I just want to know what we need to do."
Yeah.
Great. Yeah, question from Tiano Tuiono.
Yeah, I was just-
Exactly, on a daily basis.
Oh.
I was just thinking about your construction example.
What's an example where something could go from that high risk to critical risk?
Because then
all of a sudden, a whole lot of different things kick in, right?
Because if it's critical risk, then it's covered, but if it's not, then it
isn't. But things change over time.
Oh, totally. And things could change on an hourly basis.
You're suddenly on a construction site and an excavator arrives to
do some groundworks, and that just introduces a whole different level of
risk that the site has to manage. And on construction sites,
particularly bigger ones, you could have up to
eight, nine different companies all working on the site at any one time, having to
collaborate with each other on work,
which is why having a two-tiered system where, as a
main contractor, you're on site and going, "Well, half of these guys only have
to manage critical risks under the act, and the other half have to manage all the
risks on site," is just kind of untenable, really.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you, Brett. Very insightful and helpful submission from you,
and we appreciate your time and contribution to the process.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to our next submitter.
We have Unite Union,
Gabriella and Shanna.
I see Shanna's online, but Gabriella might be late.
Welcome, Shanna. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
We have Gabriella with you? Beautiful.
Microphone.
Is your microphone on? Wonderful. Looks like it is.
No.
Let's just do a sound check. No. Ah, no, the sound's not working-
Turn up your volume
... unfortunately.
Or check the source of your microphone.
Oh, yes, there we go.
Wonderful. Okay.
Beautiful. Ten minutes is yours, includes time for questions. Over to you.
Great. Thank you so much. Kia ora koutou.
I'm Shanna Olsen-Reeder. I'm the National Secretary of Unite Union, and I
have Gabriella Maria Barker with me, who is a
hospitality worker in a small PCBU.
So Unite Union strongly opposes this bill on behalf of hospitality workers.
Tens of thousands of hospitality workers work in small PCBUs,
and if this bill passes, they are all at risk.
Particularly since the pandemic, hospitality workers are reporting
increased incidences of antisocial behavior and violence.
This bill seeks to weaken the legislation when
it should in fact be looking to improve the safety of those who work in
hospitality and other industries.
The intention of this bill is apparently to reduce compliance
costs. What are these costs? It is unclear.
How do they compare to the very real potential costs of the
safety of our friends, whanau, colleagues, and neighbors?
I'm going to hand over now to a voice that I think should be listened to,
which is the voice of a hospitality worker in a small
PCBU. This is the very person who represents all of those who are at risk.
Gabriella, take it away.
Hi, everyone. I'm Gabriella Maria Barker.
I'm a member of Unite Union, and I am a
hospitality worker. I have been a barista for seven years.
Now,
in my experience in the workplace,
the main risks that have been associated with
the kind of job that I doAre those that are
explicitly not covered by this health and safety
legislation.
My friends and my colleagues have all suffered
from bullying, from harassment in the workplace,
by some degree. All of us have experienced that.
And this would remove one of the final pieces of
legislative assurance, reassurance that we have as working people,
that our experiences matter,
and that we have a voice that's worth listening to.
I'm really concerned about what it would mean also,
for businesses that employ
migrant workers.
There is a provision in the bill,
where you only have to have 20 employees, nine
months of the 12 months of the year.
And I think this creates a condition
where
migrant workers who come in for seasonal labor could be exploited.
And we know in hospitality, using casual contracts,
contract seasonal workers,
this could be a workaround that would remove
their
responsibility for the safety of their employees and of
their staff.
Another thing is musculoskeletal injuries.
Things like,
carpal tunnel syndrome, which I have seen lots of hospitality workers
suffer from. I myself have an injury in my wrist
that I've had for five years.
What I want to ask is,
reduce the costs for who?
I am a young, precariously
employed worker. I know that the health and safety
costs
for me, of my employer not being compliant, I know that that
would burden the public health system down the
line. I know that that would overload the ACC system.
If the government is worried about
taxpayer money,
then overloading the public health system
seems like something they would be
keen to avoid.
And ensuring health and safety compliance is a preventative
measure.
What are the compliance costs? Is it administrative time?
Is that worth
the money
that would
be spent on
managing these risks once they've manifested in the public health
system?
It sends the message that bullying and harassment at work is
okay, that there is a workaround.
And I'm really worried about what that's going to mean, not
just for myself, but for future generations of hospitality workers,
young people.
It's maybe their first job.
They don't know their rights.
They are so vulnerable and easily exploited.
And
I'm worried about that duty of care, that
responsibility
being taken off their employers
for their safety.
Thanks, Gabrielle.
Yeah, I just want to give you a few stats from our membership.
So we have almost 6,000 hospitality workers.
The majority of them are women.
A high number of them are under the age of 30.
We have workers from age 14 who work in hospitality.
Last week in my office, I had a 14-year-old who'd suffered a burn at work,
and had been treated appallingly by her employer.
Under this legislation, her employer would have
almost no reason to be concerned that there would be any
comeback for them under this law.
When you
have young workers coming in day to day telling you their stories
of assault, violence, stabbings, sexual
assaults,
verbal abuse,
it is very hard to understand why we would be
weakening health and safety legislation.
We are absolutely opposed to this bill,
and we ask that it be completely
thrown out. This is completely unnecessary and is
simply seeking to,
right before an election,
pass a bill under urgency that is going to harm
people and is going to hurt people.
Thank you.
Thank you. Can I just clarify for the sake of anyone listening that this bill's not
being passed under urgency?
Mm-hmm.
We're going through the full process. Great. All right.
We have probably time for one question at this stage from Teanu
Tuiono.
Kia ora, Shanna. Kia ora, Gabrielle.
Thank you very much for your very clear and strong submission and strong
proposal. It was very, very clear for me.
And just to acknowledge, and I'm sure everybody around the room, that harassment
and bullying in the workplace is not acceptable.
No.
I'm sure that's clear for everybody around the table.
Agree.
I was wondering if you could tell us a bit more about the impacts of
the abilities for employers to be able to fluctuate their staffing,
to make sure that it keeps it under 20,
from your perspective, and what that could do for those people
who have, say, carpal syndrome,
or other kind of injuries, which could, because
of this more workload,
push those injuries to become more worse and
what that could do.
Yeah, sure.
So there's a couple of parts to that.
The first is that this would allow employers
to seek to get around legislation by
cutting their staffing numbers.
20 seems to be an arbitrary number that's been pulled out of thin air.
And so if an employer simply wants to get around it, they can just cut their
staffing numbers. Unfortunately, the result of that is obviously the
existing staff have to do more work.
They're pushed to work harder and faster.
We already see that actually, since COVID.
Since COVID, a lot of hospitality workers
have had to do more shifts, and obviously when you are doing
sometimes quite physical work,
20-liter kegs, for example, carting them around,
it's pretty obvious to see that can have an effect on your
body. If you're making twice as many coffees in a day,
then you can see how you can get carpal tunnel.
So yeah, unfortunately, we think down the track, the costs of this to
our society are going to be way too high.
Thank you very much, Shanna and Gabriella.
We do appreciate your participation in the process and your really helpful
submission. Thank you.
Thank you.
We'll move on now to Mates in Construction.
We have John Chapman and Richard Nork.
Good morning, John.
Morena.
Have you got Richard joining you in the frame or on a separate screen?
Kia ora. Unfortunately, Richard can't join us thanks to an accident-
Oh, it's all right
... on the Northwestern Motorway this morning.
Oh, no.
Yes. Great Auckland traffic.
Jeez. Oh, well, John, we've got you.
You've got us. Ten minutes, and it includes time for questions, so we'll
hand it over to you now.
Morena koutou, e te nei ata.
Tena koe Chair, committee members.
Ko Waiakea, John Chapman ahau.
CEO for Mates in Construction here in Aotearoa.
We're just a charitable organization that are dedicated to suicide prevention,
and mental health support within the construction industry.
Industry led, brought here to New Zealand, on the industry's
initiative.
We operate nationally, right across the country, and we work
alongside the very firms and organizations this bill is most
focused on.
First of all, we just want to acknowledge and support the bill
and its intent and principle,
especially with the focus on the serious harm and reducing compliance burden.
It's the right goal. It's what we believe is the right thing to achieve.
However, we do believe that the bill as drafted in its current form
may not achieve this,
especially for the workers that we believe are most at risk, especially within our
construction industry.
Probably the number one frame that
supports this from our perspective is that our research suggests
that New Zealand construction workers are far more likely to pass
from suicide than actually a physical workplace accident.
And our research shows this, that you are eight to nine times more likely to
pass from suicide or mental health-related issues.
The core problem for us is the bill proposed to prevent physical harm.
Totally agree,
but in our opinion, it may fall short on that test.
Mental health cannot be separated from physical safety
in construction. We actually believe it's a prerequisite for it.
A mentally unwell, fatigued, or distressed worker is more likely to cause or
suffer from physical accident on site.
Our research suggests that psychosocial harm is also actually a critical risk
multiplier
that amplifies the accidents that this very bill aims to
prevent.
None of this is actually addressed in the bill.
Sorry. WorkSafe's own 2025 guideline recognizes
psychosocial hazards, and this bill, we believe, actually moves us backwards,
rather than promoting it. And obviously, with our focus on the mental
health side of things, we wanted to bring that to your attention.
The small PCBU problem that we have,
for fewer than 20 workers,
and I think Brett Murray just alluded to this in
what he covered a couple of
submissions ago. A thousand workers on site,
300 are direct employees. That's spread across 40
subcontractors. They'll all be under 20 staff,
and so
it's directed towards those members.
Everyone becomes a small PCBU in this case, and with mental health
fatigue and psychosocial harm, all of those lose their legal priority
across most of that sector.
An example would be that
two workers, identical tasks, side by side,
they have different legal protections based solely on the employer headcount.
So big company,
small company, but it's going to be a difference depending on whether the size
of under 20.
We just have three specific asks, that we amend the critical risk
definition to capture cumulative psychosocial harm as a pathway to death and
serious injury.
We fix the small PCBU inequity,
and we possibly direct the likes of
WorkSafe to develop a construction mental health ACOP
urgently, and doing this in consultation with the likes of CHASNZ,
Site Safe, and Mates in Construction.
We believe the committee's intents are solid. The bill is drafted.
However, the bill as the way it's drafted, we don't believe it will achieve
everything that it's set out to do.Happy to take questions.
Thank you very much, John. We have a first question from Shannon Halbert.
Tena koe, John. Good to see you.
Kia ora.
And love the mahi that you guys do.
Thank you.
A number of submitters have highlighted that this creates a two-tier
system.
What's your view on that? And particularly as follow-up
around the small PCBU, the number 20
that's within the legislation,
is that the right number?
How does that apply within the context that you're talking about?
Should it be lower?
The first part of that question is that 20, for a
PCBU,
most of our organizations within the construction industry, I believe it's over
50%,
are under 15. Most of them under 10, actually.
It's the one man in a van that may have a couple of apprentices and
a senior worker. And so
the 20 side of it versus the bigger organization, I'm not sure if the
number is actually the issue. It's how we define
the responsibilities and what that causes an
inequity for the two.
Okay, kia ora.
All right. Thank you. And then next question from Teanau Tuiono.
Kia ora, John. Thank you very much for your presentation and acknowledging-
Uh-huh
... acknowledging that work. You used the term critical risk
multiplier, and I've never heard that before.
And I know that you did outline it in your submission.
I wonder if you could explain that
so that it's
clear for the committee, but also give us some examples of
how that could play out.
Yeah. Sure.
The multiplier, if you come onto site and you
have a psychosocial stress that's affecting you, it could be a
relationship, it could be financial issues, your attention to detail on
site isn't necessarily there. It's worrying about all the other
components to it. So I think
Brett Murray in his previous one talked about a
digger coming onto site. And an example, if you're the spotter
for that digger and your mind's elsewhere, then you might
miss something. You might misplace a cone, you might not look at another vehicle
coming from another side. And so because of all these stresses that you have,
and you're not in the right frame of mind, that could actually lead
to injuries.
Yeah, missing some significant changes in the
environment that can cause not just injury, but
actually death as well.
Mm.
Mm. Thank you.
Thank you, John. Hey, quick question from me.
Yeah, sure.
When you talk about the mental health ACOF, do you see that as being
per industry or
universal?
Good question. Universal.
Okay.
Yeah, not just industry specific.
However, I think you can definitely
start with a pilot, an example of, and then-
Mm
... work your way through it.
And if you maybe identify three or four of your key
larger industries-
Mm
... primary industries, fisheries-
... construction, where there are high numbers of mental health
issues and suicide
statistics, that could be a good place to start.
Thank you, John. A really
important submission you've made, and we really appreciate it.
Thank you for being part of the process.
Ma mei. Kia ora, kei te.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Okay. Committee, we're going out of public session.